oh
[Music]
uh
foreign
[Music]
let's first begin with
or the loosening practices
beginning with the neck movements
keep the legs apart
palms on the waist
now as you exhale bring the chin closer
to the chest
inhale
and lift the head up look towards the
roof
two more rounds
[Applause]
[Music]
slowly back to center
right and left bending exhale
drop the ear to the right shoulder
inhale
come back exhale
drop the left ear towards the left
shoulder two more rounds
[Music]
slowly come back to center right and
left twisting
exhale
and look over the right shoulder inhale
center exhale
look over the left shoulder
two more rounds
[Music]
slowly come back to the center again
neck rotation
as you exhale drop the chin down to the
chest
inhale
and take the neck towards the right side
exhale
drop the chin down again inhale
lift the neck towards the left side
two more rounds
[Music]
come back to center
look straight ahead
bring the feet back together and release
your hands
shoulder rotations
bring the fingertips on the shoulders
let's begin with the forward rotation
inhale and raise both the elbows up
exhale bring it as close together as
possible and down
two more rounds
[Music]
now backward rotation
now slowly back to center
release the hands down to samasthiti
trunk movements
first trace both the hands up to
shoulder level
and then separate the legs the shoulder
width apart now as you exhale twist from
the right side
inhale and come back to center
exhale
and twist from the left side
inhale
come back to center two more rounds
exhale
look back
inhale center
exhale
towards the left inhale
center
exhale
to the right side
inhale
center
exhale
to the left side
slowly come back to center
bring the feet back together
release the hands back to samasthiti
the next one is the knee movements
first spread both the legs shoulder
width apart
stretch both the hands forward as you
exhale
go to a semi squat position
bring the thigh and the palms parallel
to the floor now inhale and straighten
the knees come up two more rounds
[Music]
release the hands feet back together
back to samasthiti
standing postures
tadasana
first spread both the legs shoulder
width apart
and stretch both the hands out
interlock the fingers and stretch the
hands outwards
now inhale
and stretch both the hands up and raise
the heels up
let's balance here for a few seconds
keep breathing
and then slowly
let's release the hands
and the legs simultaneously
hands down and legs back
and slowly release
to samasthiti
let's move forward with vrikshasana
first both the palms on the waist and
with the hand support bring the right
heel to the inner thigh
the palms in namaskara mudra
inhale and stretch both the hands up
and balance here for a few seconds
keep breathing
and once you're done slowly release the
namaskara mudra with the hand support
release the legs
back to samasthiti
and let's repeat it on the left side
[Music]
pada
first spread both the legs to one foot
apart
inhale raise both the hands up exhale
lengthen the spine bring the palms next
to the feet
inhale
raise both the hands up release the
hands bring the feet back together to
samasthiti
the next one is ardha chakras now keep
the legs slightly apart
support your lower back with the palms
wrists together
now inhale
open the chest
lean back
if you're comfortable drop your head
back
stay there for a few seconds
and slowly come up release the hands
bring the feet back together to
the next asana is trikonas now first
spread both the legs three to four feet
apart hand stretched out shoulder level
both the palms facing forward turn the
right dough outward now keeping the hips
squared exhale
bring the right palm outside of the
right foot
look up to the left middle finger now
inhale
come back to center turn the right
toe in
turn the left toe out and repeat the
same thing on the left side
now slowly inhale and come up
turn the left foot in bring the feet and
the palms back to samasthiti
now the next set of asanas are the
seated asanas but the konasana first
let's start from dandasana keep the back
straight fold the right leg and then the
left leg
hold the foot with both the hands
[Music]
engage the pelvic floor and give a good
lift to the spine
and hold it
for a few seconds
now let's slowly step by step release
the legs back to dandasana
let's begin from dandasana again first
fold the right leg
place the heel under the buttocks and
then the left leg
heel under the buttocks
palms rested comfortably on the thigh
and spine uplifted
hold here for a few seconds
now let's step by step release release
the left leg first and then the right
leg
back to dandasana
the next asana is ardha strasna pram
bend both the legs to vajrasana
[Music]
and slowly come on the knees
separate the legs slightly
and support the lower back with the
palms
now open the chest inhale push the hip
forward
and drop your head back if you're
comfortable
hold here for a few seconds
keep breathing
slowly come back to the center
release the palms
knees back together sit in vajrasana
and step by step release the legs back
to dandasana
[Music]
first begin from dandasana moving on to
vajrasana
[Music]
stand on the knees and slightly separate
the legs now place the right palm on the
right sole of the foot and the left palm
on the left sole of the foot
inhale push the hip forward and gently
drop your head back if you're
comfortable
once you're done
slowly left palm on the abdomen
roll on from the right side
come up
knees together
and sit back in vajrasana
slowly release the legs forward to
dandasana
and relax
next asana
shashankasana or adho mukhavirasana
let's start with dandasana taking the
legs back one by one towards rasna
and separating the knees
now stretch both the hands forward and
drop the forehead on the mat
[Music]
slowly lift the head up bring the hands
back
knees back
[Music]
and slowly release the legs one by one
to dandasana
the next seated asana is utthana
mandukasana
from dandasana gently get into vajrasana
spread the knees apart
now raise the right arm bring the right
palm on the left shoulder blade
and left palm on the right shoulder
plate and sit here for a few seconds
now slowly release the left hand and
then the right hand
bring the knees closer to vajrasana
and stretch the legs forward one after
the other to dandasana
and relax
going forward with vacrasana
from dandasana bend the right knee
right hand behind the back now inhale
and raise the left hand up and hook the
left armpit over the right thigh
look over the right shoulder
and stay here for a few seconds
slowly step by step release
and repeat the same thing on the left
side
make sure the opposite leg is active on
the mat
[Music]
going forward with the prone postures
the base
asana for all the prone postures is
makarasana
first bend both the elbows
place the chin on top of the palms palms
facing down
spread both the legs hip width apart
turning both the toes outwards
respectively
from makarasana
first bring the feet together place both
the palms beside the chest now inhale
and lift up
look straight ahead keeping the feet
together
now slowly exhale drop the forehead down
and release the hands release the legs
back to makarasana
from makarasana
first bring the feet together
place the palms under the hip palms
facing upward chin down now inhale and
raise both the legs up keeping the feet
together as much as possible
take a few breaths and slowly release
the legs
release the hands back into makarasana
now let's start with the supine asanas
say to bandasana
from shavasana bend both the legs at the
knees
legs hip width apart now catch hold of
the ankles with the respective hands
inhale and lift your hip up as high as
possible
bringing the chest closer to the chin
if holding the ankles is difficult press
the palms on top of the mat
let's hold here for a few seconds
[Music]
and as you exhale let's slowly release
the spine down
release the legs and the hands back into
shavasana
from shavasana bring both the legs
together palms beside the hip
engage the pelvic floor inhale and lift
the legs up 45 degrees
and hold here for a few seconds
now as you exhale slowly drop the legs
down hands back to shavasana
bring the legs back together palms
beside the hip
now inhale and raise both the legs up 90
degrees
perpendicular to the mat
take a few deep breaths
once we're done exhale bring the legs
back on the mat
and separate the hands to shavasana
pavana
bring the feet together
bend the knees
and bring the knees closer to the chest
and hug the thighs
now exhale bring the chin between the
knees and hold here for a few seconds
now inhale drop the head down
release the legs back to shavasana
shavasana
keep both the legs apart
toes pointed outwards
palms facing the ceiling
shoulders away from the ears
and eyes softly closed now make gentle
movements in the toes
fingers
gently bring the feet together
raise the right hand up left palm on the
belly bend the knees and roll on to the
right side
now with minimum movements come to a
comfortable seated posture
eyes closed and back straight
now sit comfortably as we begin the
pranayama practices
let's begin with kapalabhati
first make sure the spine is straight
hands in chin mudra or gyanamatra
now take a deep breath
and start exhaling through the nose
contracting the abdominal muscles
in a rhythmic manner
continue for about 30 to 60 strokes
according to your comfort
and once you're done
try and observe the cable kumbaka in
your breath
nadi shodhana
bring the right hand in nasi kamutra
now cover the right nostril with the
thumb and inhale through the left
nostril
cover both the nostrils release the
right
thumb and exhale through the right
nostril
now repeat the same thing on the other
side
and continue for a few more rounds
[Music]
once you're done with the practice
release the right hand back to gyana
mudra or chin mudra
moving forward with the cooling
pranayama
sheetali
first roll the tongue
into a tube shape
inhale through the mouth
close the mouth and exhale
through the nose
again inhale through the mouth
and exhale
through the nose
repeat for a few more times
[Music]
and slowly stop the practice
starting our last pranayama practice
brahmari pranayama
and from here inhale deeply through the
nose
and while you exhale prolong a humming
beast sound
prolong for as long as you can
[Music]
give a second or two's break and repeat
the same thing for the next few rounds
a variation for the shanmukhi mudra is
to just cover the ears with the index
finger
inhale through the nose exhale with the
humming beast sound
[Music]
once you're done with the practice
release the hands back to chin mudra
and observe the vibrations in the head
and let's now close the practice
[Music]
sukhina
foreign
[Music]
rub the palms against each other
create some warmth
and cup your eyes
and slowly with a few gentle blings open
your eyes
look into your palms
smile
namaste and thank you
[Music]